# LLVM Pass to Extract Basic Blocks and Instructions

## Description

This project provides two LLVM passes that can be used to obfuscate a target
program by modifying the program's control flow and call graph. The control
flow for individual functions will be obfuscated by converting transitions
between basic blocks from traditional branch instructions to calls. This has
the effect of making a function's control flow logic interprocedural, which is
often poorly handled by traditional reverse engineering tools.

This project produces two optimization passes, each implemented as an LLVM
plugin. The `LLVMExtractBB.so` plugin will convert basic block transitions to
calls as described earlier. The `LLVMExtractInst.so` plugin will split basic
blocks into individual instructions before modifying basic block transitions.
This causes a significant increase in the number of functions in the resulting
binary.

TODO: Comparison pictures

Note that loops in a function will be transformed into recursive function calls
as a side effect of this pass. As such, infinte or high repition loops may
result in stack exhaustion.


## Build Instructions

This project can be built as an out-of-tree module, or directly within the LLVM
source tree.

### Out of Tree Build

1. Install build dependencies.

    apt install cmake clang-8 llvm-8.0-dev

1. Compile the plugins with cmake.

    mkdir build && cd build
    cmake ..
    make -j2

### In Tree Build

1. Create a symlink or copy the `ExtractBB` directory to
`<LLVM_root>/lib/Transforms`.

1. Add `add_subdirectory(<pass name>)` to
`<LLVM_root>/lib/Transforms/CMakeLists.txt`.

1. Build LLVM as described in the LLVM documentation.


## Usage

Both plugins can be loaded directly from the compiler driver, or invoked
manually with the `opt` tool. If loaded by the compiler driver, the plugin's
pass will automatically run regardless of the optimization level. If loaded by
`opt`, you must specify an additional flag to enable the pass.

To compile using a compiler driver:

    clang-8 -Xclang -load -Xclang ./LLVMExtract(BB|Inst).so test.c

To compile using `opt`:

    clang-8 -c -emit-llvm test.c
    opt-8 -load ./LLVMExtract(BB|Inst).so -extractbb test.bc > test_opt.bc
    clang-8 test_opt.bc

### Debugging the Plugin

To debug or view statistics generated by this plugin, the following additional
options can be passed to `opt`.

Print debug output from all passes:

    opt-8 -debug -load ./LLVMExtract(BB|Inst).so -extractbb test.bc > test_opt.bc

Print debug output from only this plugin's pass:

    opt-8 -debug-only=extractbb -load ./LLVMExtract(BB|Inst).so -extractbb test.bc > test_opt.bc

Print duration of all passes:

    opt-8 --time-passes -load ./LLVMExtractBB.so -extractbb test.bc > test_opt.bc

Print the pass structure:

    opt-8 --debug-pass=Structure -load ./LLVMExtractBB.so -extractbb test.bc > test_opt.bc

Debug the pass itself:

    gdb opt-8
    run -load ./LLVMExtractBB.so -extractbb test.bc > test_opt.bc
